% Review of No Silver Bullet by Fred Brooks
% Pradeep Gowda
% Aug 22, 2012



This paper by Fred Brooks addresses the inherent difficulties involved
in the construction of software. The author distinguishes between the
*accidental*
difficulties, which affect the process of development but are not
inherent to
the final system and *essential* difficulties, which are inherent to the
system. The progress in hardware technology, development of new, higher
level
programming languages and constructs help in mitigating the accidental
difficulties. Of the silverbullets proposed, some have influenced the
direction of software development (eg: Ada, OOP), others like program
verification, IDEs, cheap & abudant processing power have managed to
affect
the accidental complexity to a large extent. Expert systems, AI,
automated &
graphical programming are of little help in deciding and defining what
the
software should do.

The author identifies complexity, conformity,
changeability and invisibility as the essential properties of the
system.
Developing and distributing reusable software components in place of
custom
development has the benefit of reduced costs via cost-sharing, improved
documentation and generalisation of features required by the
cross-section of
the users. Rapid prototyping allows the clients to narrow down the scope
of
their requirements in faster fashion and also helps in understanding the
capabilities of software systems in an iterative process. Moving beyond
the
idea of *writing* software to *growing* software boosts the morale of
engineers and stakeholders alike. All of these proposed methods have to
championed by great designers who are trained in sound design
methodoligies,
have the ability to distinguish between good and great designs and over
time
develop the capability to deliver structures that are efficient, simple
and
effective.


Managing the entropy generated by the interplay of people, software,
hardware
is at the core of software engineering. The success of RAD tools has
given
credence to the rapid prototyping approach. Practicing software
construction
as an ongoing activity encourages the designers to make choices that
address
the essential problems instead of getting lost in the accidental
aspects,
which in practice demand significant attention. Many recent software
development methodologies such as continuous integration, agile
programming,
emphasise the importance of the engineers, and customers having access
to the
software as it is built.


This allows all the stakeholders to get
familiar with
the system capability from top-down and consequently influence the
direction
of software development. The idea of software a living, growing entity
is a
powerful one and one that encourages the desiger to make decisions that
are
congruent with that expectation. The pervasive adoption of component
vendors
and Open source software development model has proven that the "buy over
build" approach has succeeded spectacularly.
